# CS-330: Module 8 Journal

## Briefly summarize the requirements and goals of the app you developed. What user needs was this app designed to address?
The primary goal of my application was to provide a simple, fast, and efficient way for users to keep track of their weights over time and set goal weights, as well as review previously entered data. The app was primarily designed around the idea of accomplishing one main task (keeping track of weight) with a no-nonsense approach to avoid feeling bloated or overcomplicated, as is common with the top apps often used for weight tracking in the current market (such as MyFitnessPal or Apple Health).

## What screens and features were necessary to support user needs and produce a user-centered UI for the app? How did your UI designs keep users in mind? Why were your designs successful?
The main displays required for the app to meet requirements were a login screen (providing users a way to either log in to an existing account or register a new account), a data display screen (displaying a grid view of past entered weight data, where the user could interact with this data or make new entries), and a permissions request screen (used to request optional access to SMS permission on the user's device for goal notifications). Additionally, SQLite was integrated in the app to provide a database for storage of user credentials and weight entries.
In order to keep the UI as user-friendly as possible, I tried to take a minimal approach to its design. Part of this was due to my limited knowledge of mobile development, but I also wanted to keep the application focused on performing its job as well as possible. I made use of Android's developer guidelines in terms of text size and touch targets for a mobile device, and regularly referencing my own experiences with the apps I've used over time in terms of what I felt was efficient and user-friendly design.

## How did you approach the process of coding your app? What techniques or strategies did you use? How could those techniques or strategies be applied in the future?
As I went into this project with almost no prior mobile development experience, I found the Android developer documentation to be my main reference source throughout the development process. My daily-use mobile OS for the past several years has been iOS, so I also found that spending additional time poking around the emulator and interacting with the stock Android apps gave me a better sense of the typical flow of user interaction within Android. Mobile development also required me to do a lot of research into building interfaces optimized for the smaller screens found on mobile devices, as opposed to the regular desktop-class applications I have worked on previously. This meant I had to put significantly more thought into the amount of information I was putting on-screen at a time (to avoid overwhelming the user or creating an overly busy interface) as well as find the right balance of interactivity for the user and making efficient use of screen space (such as how much I wanted to allow the user to interact with the data display grid).

## How did you test to ensure your code was functional? Why is this process important, and what did it reveal?
The main method of testing my app was first through setting breakpoints for testing smaller functions, followed by more thorough testing in the Android device emulator. I found using the Android emulator to be particularly important because it gave me a sense of how a user would feel actually using the app as opposed to trying to debug lines of code by myself. In addition to providing what felt like a more realistic testing environment, it highlighted design and UI flaws that I likely wouldn't have picked up just looking at my code- as a simple example, I found that in my initial design process, I had a lot of inconsistencies when it came to padding of UI elements and text size; by being able to see how my changes would actually look on a mobile device, I was able to put together a more cohesive and consistent interface.

## Consider the full app design and development process from initial planning to finalization. Where did you have to innovate to overcome a challenge?
The major challenge I faced in this project was implementation of SMS notifications upon reaching a goal weight, setting permissions appropriately, and ensuring the app's basic functionality remained even a user declined SMS permissions. This was mainly due to my unfamiliarity with mobile development and how the Android OS handles shared permissions, which was vastly different from what I was used to on desktop operating systems. This required a thorough review of Android's developer documentation, turning to YouTube, looking at implementation of SMS notifications in some open-source Android apps, and turning to StackOverflow when I truly got stuck. In the end, I was able to get the SMS notifications system working, but in the future, I'd also seriously consider having an Android device dedicated to development if it was a platform I worked on regularly.

## In what specific component of your mobile app were you particularly sucessful in demonstrating your knowledge, skills, and experience?
I am satisfied with my implementation of the data display screen. While the first half of the course helped build my familiarity with building interfaces in Android Studio through XML layouts, putting together a grid layout that would pull the weight database, update dynamically, and allow the user to make modifications was a daunting task developing on an unfamiliar platform. I found that Android's modularity was a major advantage here, as once I had decided on using the TableLayout view and sorted out implementing a header row, it became more of a matter of setting the layout up similarly to any of the other views I had grown familiar with, and I could put more thought into keeping the table view visually appealing, yet simple.
